.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.Dd May 18, 2020
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.Dt PIMDD 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pimdd
.Nd PIM-DM multicast routing daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm pimdd
.Op Fl hnsv
.Op Fl f Ar FILE
.Op Fl d Ar SYS[,SYS,...]
.Op Fl l Ar LEVEL
.Op Fl w Ar SEC
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a stand-alone PIM-DM multicast routing daemon available under the
4-clause BSD license.  This is the restored original from University of
Oregon, by Kurt Windisch.
.Nm pimdd
is a PIM Dense Mode (PIM-DM) implementation based on
.Nm pimd ,
which is the PIM Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) reference implementation, by Ahmed
Helmy, Rusty Eddy and Pavlin Ivanov Radoslavov.
.Pp
PIM-DM is a significantly less complex protocol than PIM-SM.  PIM-DM
works on the principle that it is probable that any given multicast
streamwill have at least one downstream listener. PIM-DM is ideal where
many hosts subscribe toreceive multicast packets, so most of the PIM
Routers receive and forward all multicastpackets.
.Pp
Where PIM-SM only forwards a multicast stream when requested, PIM-DM
always floods anynew multicast stream that arrives at the PIM Router and
only stops flooding the multicaststream on a given link if it is
explicitly told to, by receiving a Prune message from the downstream PIM
Router.
.Pp
PIM-DM does not include the concepts of Rendez-vous Points, which are
used in PIM-SM.  PIM-SM explicitly builds unidirectional shared trees
rooted at a Rendez-vous Point (RP) pergroup.  PIM-DM implicitly builds
shortest-path trees by flooding multicast traffic domain wide, then
prunes back branches of the tree where no receivers are available.  As
with PIM-SM, so does PIM-DM also use Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) to
stop loops for packet forwarding for PIM Routers receiving multicast
packets.
.Ss Terminology
.Bl -tag
.It Em PIM Router
Any Layer-3 routing device that is running PIM, i.e., the physical
device doing the actual forwarding, communicting using PIM frames with
neighboring routers.
.It Em Reverse Path Forwarding
The mechanism that PIM uses to make sure it does not forward multicast
streams around in loops.  If a set of PIM Routers are connected in a
loop, and each PIM Router is forwarding a given multicast stream, then
eventually the multicast stream would be forwarded right around the
loop.
.Pp
To prevent this from happening, PIM makes use of the fact that the
unicast routing tables in a set of PIM Routers should converge into a
loop-free tree of paths to any given destination.  When a
.Em PIM Router
receives a multicast stream from source address
.Sy A
through an interface
.Sy IF1 ,
it checks whether
.Sy IF1
is the interface the
.Em PIM Router
would use to reach
.Sy A .
The
.Em PIM Router
only forwards the multicast stream if
.Sy IF1
is the interface the
.Em PIM Router
would use to reach
.Sy A .
RPF determines whether the interface is correct by consulting unicast
routing tables.  This ensure that the multicast stream is forwarded in a
loop-free manner back up the tree of unicast paths that lead to the
source.
.It Em Forwarding multicast packets
.Em PIM Routers
forward a given multicast stream onto all PIM enabled IP interfaces that
have not received a Prune for the given multicast stream.  As with
unicast routing, the
.Em PIM Router
decrements the TTL (Time To Live) field in the IP header of each
packet that the
.Em PIM Router
forwards.  The packet is discarded if the TTL is decremented to 0.  However,
unlike unicast routing, the destination MAC addresses of the packets are
not altered as they are forwarded by the
.Em PIM Router .
The destination MAC addresses remain set to the multicast MAC addresses
corresponding to the destination group address of the multicast stream.
.It Em Upstream
Direction towards the Source.
.It Em Downstream
Any other than the upstream interface for that group.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
This program follows the usual UNIX command line syntax.  The options
are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h
Print a help message and exit.
.It Fl f Ar FILE
Specify an alternative configuration file, default:
.Pa /etc/pimdd.conf .
.It Fl d Ar SYS[,SYS...]
This option controls extended subsystem debugging, use
.Cm all
to enable all subsystems.
.Pp
Available subsystems are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width pim_routes -compact -offset indent
.It Cm graft
Grafting operations, or grafted routes
.It Cm packet
Debug inbound/outbout packets
.It Cm prunes
Pruning operations, or pruned routes
.It Cm routes
Routing messages
.It Cm neighbors
Neighbor gossip
.It Cm mfc
Debug multicast forwarding cache
.It Cm timeout
Debug timeouts
.It Cm interface
Show interface (VIF) debug messages
.It Cm groups
Debug group memberships
.It Cm trace
Multicast traceroute information
.It Cm igmp
Debug IGMP messages
.It Cm rsrr
Debug RSRR messages
.It Cm pim
All PIM messages
.It Cm mrt
PIM routing messages
.It Cm bsr
PIM bootstrap router messages
.It Cm detail
Detailed PIM debug
.It Cm hello
Debug hello messages to/from neighbors
.El
.It Fl n
Run in the foreground, do not detach from calling terminal and do not
fork to background.  Useful not only when debugging (above) but also
when running under a process monitor like daemontools, runit, finit, or
systemd.  Remember to also use
.Fl s ,
to send all logs to the syslog daemon, unless you want to debug
.Nm
and run in the foreground.
.It Fl l Ar LEVEL
Set log level to one of the following, default
.Nm notice :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width WARNING -compact -offset indent
.It Cm none
Disable all logging
.It Cm error
Error conditions
.It Cm warning
Warning conditions
.It Cm notice
Normal but significant condition (Default)
.It Cm info
Informational
.It Cm debug
Debug-level messages
.El
.It Fl v
Show
.Nm
version
.It Fl w Ar SEC
Initial startup delay of
.Ar SEC
seconds before probing for interfaces.  Useful if
.Nm
starts before interfaces are created and have an IP address.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The configuration is kept in the file
.Pa /etc/pimdd.conf .
The file format is relatively free-form: whitespace (including newlines)
is not significant.  However, the order of some statements are
important, more on this below.
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
runs on all multicast capable interfaces.  The
.Cm phyint
setting can be used to control this behavior.
.Pp
.Bl -item -offset indent
.It
.Cm default-route-distance
.Ar <1-255>
.It
.Cm default-route-metric
.Ar <1-1024>
.It
.Cm phyint
.Cm <address>
.Bl -item -offset indent
.Op Cm disable
.Op Cm distance Ar <1-255>
.Op Cm igmpv2 | igmpv3
.Op Cm metric Ar <1-1024>
.El
.El
.Pp
The
.Cm default-route-distance
option has nothing to do with the system default route, it is rather the
default value for the unicast routing protocol's administrative
distance.  It is used in PIM Assert elections to determine upstream
routers.  Currently
.Nm
cannot obtain the admin distance and metric from the unicast routing
protocols, so a default routing protocol distance (the RFC confusingly
refers to this as
.Em metric prefererence )
may be configured.  In a PIM Assert election, the router advertising the
lowest assert preference will be selected as the forwarder and upstream
router for the LAN.  Setting 101 should be sufficiently high so that
asserts from Cisco or other routers preferred over
.Nm .
.Pp
It is recommended that distances be set such that metrics are never
consulted.  However, default routing metrics may also be set using the
.Cm default-route-metric
option.  (Again, this has nothing to do with the system default route.)
This item sets the cost for sending data through this router.  You want
only PIM-SM data to go to this daemon; so once again, a high value is
recommended to prevent accidental usage.  The preferred default value is
1024.  Both defaults can be overridden per phyint, so learned routes, or
PIM Asserts use the phyint's values.
.Pp
Please also note that PIM Assert elections are not the same as the DR
election.  The PIM Assert election determines the active multicast
forwarder, whereas the DR election determines the active PIM router.
.Pp
The
.Nm phyint
setting refers to a physical interface and must come after the
.Cm default-route-metric
and
.Cm default-route-distance
settings in the configuration file.  Select the interface by its IP
.Ar address
If you just want to activate this interface with default values, you
don't need to put anything else on the line.  However, there are some
additional settings:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -width 1n -compact
.It
.Nm disable :
Do not use this interface in
.Nm .
.It
.Cm distance Ar <1-255> :
Use this to override the
.Nm default-route-distance
(101) on this
.Nm phyint
in PIM Assert elections.
.It
.Cm igmpv2 | igmpv3 :
Force interface in specific IGMP version.  Default:
.Cm igmpv3 .
.It
.Cm metric Ar <1-1024> :
The cost of sending data through this interface.  Defaults to
.Nm default-route-metric
(1024) if not assigned.
.El
.Pp
Add one
.Nm phyint
line per interface on this router.  Otherwise
.Nm
will run on all interfaces using default settings.
.Sh SIGNALS
.Nm
responds to the following signals.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It HUP
Restart
.Nm
and reload configuration file
.It TERM
Terminate execution gracefully, i.e. by sending good-bye messages to neighboring
routers
.It INT
The same as TERM
.El
.Pp
For convenience in sending signals,
.Nm
writes its process ID to
.Pa /var/run/pimdd.pid
upon startup.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/pimdd.sock -compact
.It Pa /etc/pimdd.conf
Main configuration file
.It Pa /var/run/pimdd.pid
Pidfile (re)created by
.Nm
daemon when it has started up and is ready to receive commands.
.It Pa /var/run/pimdd.sock
.Ux Ns -domain
socket used for communication with
.Xr pimctl 8
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pimctl 8 ,
.Xr pimd 8 ,
.Xr mrouted 8 ,
.Xr smcroute 8 ,
.Xr /usr/share/doc/pimdd/
.Pp
.Nm
implements PIM-DM according to
.Lk https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-idmr-pim-dm-spec-05 draft-ietf-idmr-pim-dm-spec-05 .
The newer ratified
.Lk https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3973 RFC3973 ,
is not yet supported.
.Pp
The web page at University of Oregon,
.Lk http://antc.uoregon.edu/PIMDM/pimd-dense.html ,
are a bit out of date and the recommended guide is available in the
project's README file.
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
Was made by Kurt Windisch while at University of Oregon.  It is entirely
based on
.Nm pimd ,
which was originally written by Ahmed Helmy, George Edmond "Rusty" Eddy,
and Pavlin Ivanov Radoslavov.
.Pp
This manual page is written by by Joachim Wiberg for the
.Lk https://github.com/troglobit/pimd-dense GitHub
.Nm
project.
