.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.Dd Aug 28, 2021
.Dt PIMDD.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pimdd.conf
.Nd pimdd configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/pimdd.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
In many cases you do not need to configure
.Nm pimdd .
It configures itself automatically to forward multicast on all
multicast-capable interfaces, i.e., interfaces that have the
.Cm IFF_MULTICAST
flag set.  It locates other PIM-DM capable routers directly reachable
via those interfaces.
.Pp
.Nm pimdd
will not start with less than two enabled virtual interfaces (VIFs).  A
VIF is either a physical multicast-capable interface or a tunnel.  To
override the default settings, for example to disable some interfaces
from being used, configuration commands may be placed in
.Pa /etc/pimdd.conf .
.Pp
The file format is relatively free-form: whitespace (including newlines)
is not significant.  However, the order of some statements are
important, more on this below.
.Pp
By default,
.Nm pimdd
runs on all multicast capable interfaces.  The
.Cm phyint
setting can be used to control this behavior.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Cm assert-timeout Ao Ar 5-210 Ac
.It Cm default-route-distance Ao Ar 1-255 Ac
.It Cm default-route-metric Ao Ar 1-1024 Ac
.It Cm no phyint
.It Cm phyint Ao Ar address | Ar ifname Ac Oo Cm enable | disable Oc Oo Cm igmpv2 | igmpv3 Oc Oo Cm distance Ao Ar 1-255 Ac Oc Oo Cm metric Ao Ar 1-1024 Ac Oc
.El
.Pp
The PIM assert mechanism arbitrates the forwarder of multicast when
there are more than one router with the same (S,G) pair for a given
destination LAN.  The winner of an assert is the router with either
the best (unicast) protocol distance (called metric preference in
the RFC), or the best metric if the distance is the same, or, as a
tiebreaker, the highest IP address.  The loser of an asser election
prunes its outbound interface from forwarding and starts an assert
timer, in case the active forwarder is lost.  The
.Cm assert-timeout
can be used to tune the PIM assert timer to a value between 5 to 210
seconds, default: 180 sec.
.Pp
The
.Cm default-route-distance
option has nothing to do with the system default route, it is rather the
default value for the unicast routing protocol's administrative
distance.  It is used in PIM Assert elections to determine upstream
routers.  Currently
.Nm
cannot obtain the admin distance and metric from the unicast routing
protocols, so a default routing protocol distance (the RFC confusingly
refers to this as
.Em metric prefererence )
may be configured.  In a PIM Assert election, the router advertising the
lowest assert preference will be selected as the forwarder and upstream
router for the LAN.  Setting 101 should be sufficiently high so that
asserts from Cisco or other routers preferred over
.Nm .
.Pp
It is recommended that distances be set such that metrics are never
consulted.  However, default routing metrics may also be set using the
.Cm default-route-metric
option.  (Again, this has nothing to do with the system default route.)
This item sets the cost for sending data through this router.  You want
only PIM-DM data to go to this daemon; so once again, a high value is
recommended to prevent accidental usage.  The preferred default value is
1024.  Both defaults can be overridden per phyint, so learned routes, or
PIM Asserts use the phyint's values.
.Pp
Please also note that PIM Assert elections are not the same as the DR
election.  The PIM Assert election determines the active multicast
forwarder, whereas the DR election determines the active PIM router.
.Pp
The
.Nm phyint
setting refers to a physical interface and must come after the
.Cm default-route-metric
and
.Cm default-route-distance
settings in the configuration file.  Select the interface by its IP
.Ar address
or name.  If you just want to activate this interface with default
values, you don't need to put anything else on the line.  However, there
are some additional settings:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -width 1n -compact
.It
.Cm enable :
Enable an interface for PIM.  Used after the
.Cm no phyint
directive.
.It
.Cm disable :
Do not use this interface in
.Nm .
.It
.Cm igmpv2 | igmpv3 :
Force interface in specific IGMP version.  Default:
.Cm igmpv3 .
.It
.Cm distance Ao Ar 1-255 Ac :
Use this to override the
.Nm default-route-distance
(101) on this
.Nm phyint
in PIM Assert elections.
.It
.Cm metric Ao Ar 1-1024 Ac :
The cost of sending data through this interface.  Defaults to
.Nm default-route-metric
(1024) if not assigned.
.El
.Pp
Add one
.Nm phyint
line per interface on this router.  Otherwise
.Nm
will run on all interfaces using default settings.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/pimdd.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/pimdd.conf
Main configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pimdd 8 ,
.Xr pimctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Joachim Wiberg Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com .
